# MTA-Ridership-Analysis

The Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) is a public-benefit corporation responsible for public transportation in the state of New York. The data provided by the MTA contains systemwide ridership and traffic estimates for Subways, Buses, Long Island Rail Road, Metro-North Railroad, Access-A-Ride, and Bridges & Tunnels. The data begins from 3/1/2020 and provides a percentage comparison against a comparable pre-pandemic date.

### Overview of the data:
1. Contained 1706 entries, with 14 columns, 2 for each transit option (pre and post pandemic)
2. Only numerical values were present, barring date values.

### Workflow:
1. Evaluated data for missing fields, outliers, irregular values, date formatting & duplication.
2. Created a duplicate dataframe with renamed columns, and converted pre pandemic percentages as:
   Pre pandemic Value = (Post * 100) / Pre-Pandemic Percentage
3. Created visuals to assess the impact and forecast the recovery.

### Visuals Created:
1. Distribution analysis of each transit option via a histogram.
2. Comparison of each transit with its corresponding pre pandemic period using line charts.
3. Correlation heatmap.
4. Total Ridership comparison via pie charts.
5. Revenue Comparison between transit options
6. Time series analysis

### Forecasting
Fitted a model using Prophet API from Facebook to obtain the time series components and predictions. The following were the observations: 
1. Subways seem to have a low upward trend, indicating further time for recovery.
2. LIRR, Access-A-Ride, Staten Island Railway & Metro-North seems to have a very strong positive trend in terms of recovery.
3. Buses seems to have a downward trend, while recovery of Bridges and Tunnels seems to have become stagnant.
4. People are preferring to travel using Bridges and Tunnel majorly towards the end of the week (Barring Sunday & with a peak on Friday)
5. Ridership follows weekly pattern (Peak in the middle of the week)

### Conclusion
1. There are clear signs of recuperation and commuter ridership increments in most of the commute options. 
2. There has been a clear shift in public sentiment/mindset towards commute options indicated by the ridership comparison pie charts. More people prefer private transport using Bridges and Tunnels, and Access-A-Ride has seen greater popularity.
3. Subways are still found to be a major means of travel among the population, even after the pandemic, which justifies its place as the lifeline of the city. However, the revenue generated by the subways is still far below its pre pandemic records.
4. Subways and Buses seem to have a lot less travellers than in the pre pandemic era. Subways are still showing signs of recuperation, which cannot be said for the other options of Buses, SIR, Bridges and Tunnels.
5. Metro-North and LIRR are showing great signs of recovery.


